Internet-Draft                                                  K. Moore
Expires: 5 December 2002                         University of Tennessee
                                                             5 June 2002


       Recommendations for Automatic Responses to Electronic Mail

                   draft-moore-auto-email-response-00


Status of this Memo

This document is an Internet-Draft and is subject to all provisions of
Section 10 of RFC2026.

Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering Task
Force (IETF), its areas, and its working groups.  Note that other groups
may also distribute working documents as Internet-Drafts.

Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months
and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any
time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference material
or to cite them other than as "work in progress."

The list of current Internet-Drafts can be accessed at
http://www.ietf.org/1id-abstracts.html

The list of Internet-Draft Shadow Directories can be accessed at
http://www.ietf.org/shadow.html

This document is not currently associated with any working group.
Comments on this internet-draft should be sent to the mailing list
<ietf-822@imc.org>, or to the author.  Such comments should cite the
Internet-Draft identifier draft-moore-auto-email-response-00 so others
can be sure you are commenting on the same version they read.

Abstract

This memo makes recommendations for software that automatically responds
to incoming electronic mail messages, including "out of the office"
response generators, mail filtering software, email-based information
services, and other automatic responders.  The purpose of these
recommendations is to discourage undesirable behavior which is caused or
aggravated by such software, to encourage uniform behavior (where
appropriate) among automatic mail responders, and to clear up some
sources of confusion among implementors of automatic email responders.





Moore                  Automatic E-Mail Responses               [Page 1]
Internet-Draft                                               5 June 2002


1. Introduction

Many programs which automatically respond to email are currently in use.
Although these programs vary widely in their function, several problems
with this class of programs have been observed, including: significant
numbers of useless or unwanted response and responses sent to
inappropriate addresses, and occasional incidences of mail loops or
"sorcerer's apprentice" syndrome.  This memo recommends behavior for
programs that automatically respond to electronic mail in order to
reduce the number of problems caused by such programs.

1.1 Types of automatic responses

There are several different types of automatic responses.  At least two
types of automatic responses have been defined in IETF standards -
Delivery Status Notifications [1] which are intended to report the
status of a message delivery by the message transport system, and
Message Disposition Notifications [2] which are intended to report of
the disposition of a message after it reaches a recipient's mailbox.
These responses are defined elsewhere and are generally not within the
purview of this document, except that this document recommends specific
cases where they should or should not be used.

Other types of automatic response in common use include:

-    "Out of office" or "vacation" notices, which are intended to inform
     the sender of a message that the message is unlikely to be read, or
     acted on, for some amount of time;

-    Email-based information services, which accept requests (presumably
     from humans) via email, provide some service, and issue responses
     via email also.  (Mailing lists which accept subscription requests
     via email fall into this category);

-    Information services similar to those mentioned above except that
     they are intended to accept messages from other programs;

-    Various kinds of mail filters (including "virus scanners") which
     act on behalf of a recipient to alter the content of messages
     before forwarding them to that recipient, and issue responses in
     the event a message is altered; and

-    Responders designed to filter unsolicited messages from programs
     (e.g. a program that responds to any message from an unknown or
     unverifiable source and requires that party to "demonstrate signs
     of intelligent life" before the original message can be read.)





Moore                  Automatic E-Mail Responses               [Page 2]
Internet-Draft                                               5 June 2002


Recognizing the wide variety of response types in use, these
recommendations distinguish between several classes of automatic
responders according to the party or service on whose behalf the
responder acts:

-    "Service Responders" exist to provide access to some service via
     email requests and responses.  These are permanently associated
     with an email address, and when sending to such an address the
     sender presumably expects an automatic response.  An email-based
     file retrieval service is an example of a Service Responder.

-    "Personal Responders" exist to make automatic responses on behalf
     of a single human recipient, in advance of, or in lieu of, that
     recipient reading the message.  These responders operate according
     to criteria specified by the individual recipient.  The UNIX
     "vacation" program is an example of a Personal Responder.

-    "Group Responders" exist to make automatic responses on behalf of
     any of a group of human recipients, in advance of, or in lieu of, a
     response from the actual recipient.  Group Responders are similar
     to Personal Responders except that in the case of a Group Responder
     the criteria for responding are not set by the individual
     recipient.  A "virus scanner" program that filtered all mail sent
     to a group of recipients (say, every recipient in a particular DNS
     domain) and sent responses when a message was rejected or delivered
     in an altered form, would be an example of a Group Responder.

Appropriate behavior for a responder varies from one class to another.
A behavior which might be appropriate from a Service Responder (where
the sender is expecting an automatic response) might not be appropriate
from a Personal Responder.  For example, a Service Responder might send
a very long response to a request, or one that is not in a human-
readable format, according to the needs of that service.  However a
Personal Responder should assume that a human being is reading the
response and send only brief responses in plain text.

1.2. Notation

The key words "MUST", "MUST NOT", "REQUIRED", "SHALL", "SHALL NOT",
"SHOULD", "SHOULD NOT", "RECOMMENDED",  "MAY", and "OPTIONAL" in this
document are to be interpreted as described in [3].

2. Format of automatic responses

The following sections specify details of the contents of automatic
responses, including the header of the response message, the content of
the response, and the envelope in which the response is transmitted to
the email transport system.



Moore                  Automatic E-Mail Responses               [Page 3]
Internet-Draft                                               5 June 2002


2.1 Message header

The fields in the message header SHOULD be set as follows:

2.1.1 From field

In correspondence between humans, the From field serves multiple
purposes: It identifies the author of the message (or in some cases, the
party or parties on whose behalf the message was sent), and it is the
default destination of replies from humans.  Also, unfortunately some
mail systems still send nondelivery reports and other kinds of automatic
responses to the From address.

For automatic responses, the role of the From field in determining the
destination of replies from humans is less significant, because in most
cases it is not useful or appropriate for a human (or anyone) to reply
to an automatic response. (The exception is when there is some problem
with the response; it should be possible to provide feedback to the
person operating the responder).

So the From address in an automatic response needs to be chosen
according to the following criteria:

-    To provide an indication of the party or agent on whose behalf the
     response was sent,

-    To provide an address to which a recipient of an inappropriate
     response can request that the situation be corrected, and

-    To diminish the potential for mail loops.

The following behavior is thus recommended:

-    For responses sent by Service Responders, the From field SHOULD
     contain an address which can be used to reach the (human)
     maintainer of that service, and the human-readable portion of the
     From field (the phrase preceding the address) SHOULD contain a name
     or description of the service to identify the service to humans.

-    For responses sent by Personal Responders, the From field SHOULD
     contain the name of the recipient and an address chosen by the
     recipient to be recognizable to correspondents. Normally this would
     be the same address that was used to send mail to that recipient.

     In the case of a recipient having multiple mail addresses forwarded
     to the same mailbox (and responder), a Personal Responder MAY use
     heuristics to guess, based on the information available in various
     message header fields, which of several addresses for that



Moore                  Automatic E-Mail Responses               [Page 4]
Internet-Draft                                               5 June 2002


     recipient the sender is likely to have used, and use that address
     in the From field of the response.  However any address chosen by
     this method MUST have been explicitly allowed by the recipient on
     whose behalf the responder is operating.

     Note: Due to privacy reasons it may be inappropriate for responders
     to disclose an address that is derived, say, from the recipient's
     login information (e.g. POP or IMAP user name or account name on a
     multiuser computer) or which discloses the specific name of the
     computer where the response was generated.  Furthermore these do
     not necessarily produce a valid public email address for the
     recipient.  For this reason the From field of a Personal Response
     SHOULD be settable by the recipient on whose behalf the responder
     is acting.

-    For Group Responders, the From address SHOULD contain an email
     address which could be used to reach the maintainer of that Group
     Responder.  Use of the Postmaster address for this purpose is NOT
     RECOMMENDED.

     The human-readable portion of the From address (the phrase before
     the address) SHOULD contain an indication of the function performed
     by the Group Responder and on whose behalf it operates (e.g.
     "Example Agency virus filter")

2.1.2 To field

The To header field SHOULD indicate the recipient of the response.  In
general there SHOULD only be one recipient of any automatic response.
This minimizes the potential for sorcerer's apprentice syndrome and
denial-of-service attacks.

2.1.3 Date field

The Date header field SHOULD indicate the date and time at which the
response was composed.   This MUST NOT be taken as any indication of the
delivery date of the subject message, nor of the time at which the
response was sent.

2.1.4 Subject field

The Subject field SHOULD contain a brief indication that the message is
an automatic response, followed by contents of the Subject field (or a
portion thereof) of the subject message.  The prefix "Auto-Re:" MAY be
used as such an indication.

NOTE: Just as the prefix "Re:" (presumably an abbreviation of the
English word "reply") is sometimes translated to other languages by mail



Moore                  Automatic E-Mail Responses               [Page 5]
Internet-Draft                                               5 June 2002


readers, or otherwise interpreted by mail readers as indication that the
message is a reply, so the prefix "Auto-Re:" may also be translated or
used as a generic indication that the message is an automatic response.
However the "Auto-Re:" indication is intended only as an aid to humans
in processing the message.  The validity of "Auto-Re:" SHOULD NOT be
assumed by mail processing software.

2.1.5 In-Reply-To field

The In-Reply-To field SHOULD be included in the header of the response
message if there was a Message-ID field in the subject message.  If
present in the response, the In-Reply-To field SHOULD contain the
message-id of the subject message.   A References field MAY also be
supplied.

2.1.6 Auto-Submitted field

The Auto-Submitted field, with a value of "auto-replied", SHOULD be
included in the message header of any automatic response.  See section
5.

2.2 Message content

In general, messages sent by Personal or Group Responders SHOULD be
brief, and in text/plain format.  A multipart/alternative construct MAY
be used to communicate responses in multiple languages if it is
desirable to use multiple charsets.

Response messages SHOULD NOT include significant content from the
subject message. In particular responses SHOULD NOT contain non-
text/plain attachments from the subject message.

2.2.1 Use of DSNs and MDNs for automatic responses

An exception to the above policy can be made for responders whose
purpose is to filter out harmful content from incoming email.  In such
cases it may be appropriate to issue a delivery status notification
(DSN) or a message disposition notification (MDN) to indicate that such
mail has been refused, deleted, or altered.  Such a responder MAY issue
a DSN if the responder is operating as a part of the mail transport
system and has access to the message envelope, and the response is
generated on or prior to delivery to the recipient's mailbox.
Alternatively, a response MAY use the MDN format, provided the response
is generated on or after delivery to a recipient's mailbox.  An MDN
SHOULD NOT be issued as an automatic response unless the subject message
contains a Disposition-Notification-To field.  In all cases such
responses MUST conform to the DSN or MDN specifications.




Moore                  Automatic E-Mail Responses               [Page 6]
Internet-Draft                                               5 June 2002


For example, in the case of a DSN, the Action per-recipient field SHOULD
be set to "failed" with a Status code of 5.7.1 (Delivery not authorized,
message refused) if the message was not delivered due to security
reasons, and the Action field SHOULD be set to "relayed" or "delivered"
(as appropriate) with a Status code of 2.6.4 (conversion with loss
performed) if the message was modified to remove significant (presumably
harmful) content before relay or delivery but the remainder of the
message was relayed or delivered to its destination.

In the case of an MDN, a disposition mode of "automatic-action/-
MDN-sent-automatically" would be appropriate, with a disposition-type of
"deleted" or "denied" with a disposition modifier of "error" for
messages which were automatically discarded, and a disposition-type of
"processed" with a disposition modifier of "warning" for messages which
were filtered before being presented to the recipient.  The Failure: or
Warning: MDN fields could be used to supply additional information about
the reason for refusal or alteration of the message.

2.3 Message envelope

The SMTP MAIL FROM address, or other envelope return address used to
send the message, SHOULD be chosen in such a way as to make mail loops
unlikely.  A loop might occur, for instance, if both sender and
recipient of a message each have automatic responders - the recipient's
responder sends mail to the sender's responder, which sends mail back to
the recipient's responder.

The primary purpose of the MAIL FROM address is to serve as the
destination for delivery status messages and other automatic responses.
Since in most cases it is not appropriate to respond to an automatic
response, and the responder is not interested in delivery status
messages, a MAIL FROM address of <> MAY be used for this purpose.  A
MAIL FROM address which is specifically chosen for the purpose of
sending automatic responses, and which will not automatically respond to
any message sent to it, MAY be used instead of <>.

The RCPT TO address should be the address of the intended recipient of
the response.  It is RECOMMENDED that the NOTIFY=NEVER parameter of the
RCPT command be specified if the SMTP server supports the DSN option
[4].

3. When to send automatic responses

An automatic responder MUST NOT send a response for every message
received.  In practice there are always reasons to refuse to respond to
requests.  The criteria for deciding whether to respond will differ from
one responder to another, according to the responder's purpose.  In
general, care should be taken to avoid sending useless or redundant



Moore                  Automatic E-Mail Responses               [Page 7]
Internet-Draft                                               5 June 2002


responses, and to avoid contributing to mail loops and facilitating
denial-of-service attacks.

Here are some broad guidelines:

-    Automatic responses SHOULD NOT be issued in response to any message
     which contains an Auto-Submitted header field with a value of
     "auto-replied" or "auto-generated".

-    Personal and Group responses whose purpose is to notify the sender
     of a message of a temporary absence of the recipient (e.g.
     "vacation" and "out of the office" notices) SHOULD NOT issue the
     same response to the same sender more than once within a period of
     several days, even though that sender may have sent multiple
     messages.  A 7-day period is RECOMMENDED as a default.

-    Personal and Group responses whose purpose is to notify the sender
     of a message of a temporary absence of the recipient (e.g.
     "vacation" and "out of the office" notices) SHOULD NOT be issued
     unless a valid address for the recipient is explicitly included in
     the To, CC, or Bcc field of the subject message.  Since a recipient
     may have multiple addresses forwarded to the same mailbox,
     recipients SHOULD be able to specify a set of addresses to the
     responder which it will recognize as valid for that recipient.

-    Responders SHOULD NOT generate responses for any null address.
     Responders MAY refuse to generate responses for addresses commonly
     used as return addresses by responders - e.g. those with local-
     parts matching "owner-*", "*-request", "MAILER-DAEMON", etc.
     Responders SHOULD check the destination address for validity before
     generating the response, to avoid cluttering up the local mail
     queues with messages that cannot be delivered or are unlikely to be
     useful.

-    In order to avoid responding to spam and to certain kinds of
     attacks, automatic responses from Service Responders should be sent
     only for well-formed requests.  This may include checking that the
     message resulting in the response has a content-type and content
     appropriate to that service.

4. Where to send automatic responses (and where not to send them)

In general, automatic responses SHOULD be sent to the address given in
the Return-Path field, or if the responder has access to the message
envelope, the reverse-path from the SMTP MAIL command, or (in a non-SMTP
system) another envelope return address which serves as the destination
for nondelivery reports.




Moore                  Automatic E-Mail Responses               [Page 8]
Internet-Draft                                               5 June 2002


If the Return-Path field is not present in the subject message, there is
a bug in the SMTP server that delivered the message, or that SMTP server
is improperly configured.  A Personal or Group responder SHOULD NOT
deliver a response to any address other than that in the Return-Path
field, even if the Return-Path field is missing.  It is better to fix
the problem with the mail delivery system than to rely on heuristics to
guess the appropriate destination of the response.

A Service Responder MAY deliver the response to the address from the
>From field, or to another address from the request payload, provided
this behavior is precisely defined in the specification for that
service.  The Reply-To field SHOULD NOT be used for this purpose.

The Reply-To field SHOULD NOT be used as the destination for automatic
responses from Personal or Group Responders.  In general, this field is
set by a human sender based on his/her anticipation of how human
recipients will respond to the specific content of that message.  Even
for replies from humans, there are cases where it is not appropriate to
respond to the Reply-To address, especially if the sender has asked that
replies be sent to a group and/or mailing list.  Since a Personal or
Group Responder operates on behalf of a human recipient, it is safer to
assume that any Reply-To field present in the message was set by a human
sender on the assumption that any reply would come from a human who had
some understanding of the roles of the sender and other recipients.  An
automatic responder lack the information necessary to understand those
roles.  Sending automatic responses to Reply-To addresses can thus
result in a large number of people receiving a useless or unwanted
message; it can also contribute to mail loops.

Use of the From field as the destination for automatic responses has
some of the same problems as use of Reply-To.  In particular, the From
field may list multiple addresses, while automatic responses should only
be sent to a single address.  In general, the From and Reply-To
addresses are used in a variety of ways according to differing
circumstances, and for this reason Personal or Group Responders cannot
reliably assume that an address in the From or Reply-To field is an
appropriate destination for the response.

Similarly, the Sender field SHOULD NOT be used as the destination for
automatic responses.  This field is intended only to identify the person
or entity that sent the message, and is not required to contain an
address that is valid for replies.

The Return-Path address is really the only one from the message header
that can be expected, as a matter of protocol, to be suitable for
automatic responses that were not anticipated by the sender.





Moore                  Automatic E-Mail Responses               [Page 9]
Internet-Draft                                               5 June 2002


5. The Auto-Submitted header field

The purpose of the Auto-Submitted header field is to indicate that the
message was originated by an automatic process, or an automatic
responder, rather than by a human; and to facilitate automatic filtering
of messages from signal paths for which automatically generated messages
and automatic responses are not desirable.

5.1 Syntax

The syntax of Auto-Submitted is as follows:

     auto-submitted-field     = "Auto-Submitted:" CFWS
                                auto-submitted [CFWS] CRLF

     auto-submitted           = ( "no" / "auto-generated" /
                                "auto-replied" / extension )
                       opt-parameter-list

     extension                = token

     opt-parameter-list       = *( [CFWS] ";" [CFWS] LWSP parameter )


The symbols "token", and "parameter" are as defined in [5].

5.2 Semantics

The Auto-Submitted header field SHOULD NOT be supplied for messages that
were manually submitted by a human.  Such a field MAY be supplied for a
manually sent message that is intended to test the response of other
mail system components to the presence of an Auto-Submitted field in a
message.

The auto-generated keyword:

-    SHOULD be used on messages generated by automatic (often periodic)
     processes (such as UNIX "cron jobs"),

-    MUST NOT be used on manually generated messages,

-    MUST NOT be used on a message issued in direct response to another
     message.

The auto-replied keyword:

-    SHOULD be used on messages sent in direct response to another mes-
     sage,



Moore                  Automatic E-Mail Responses              [Page 10]
Internet-Draft                                               5 June 2002


-    MUST NOT be used on manually-generated messages,

-    MUST NOT be used on messages generated by automatic or periodic
     processes.

The "no" keyword may be used to explicitly indicate that a message was
originated by a human.

Extension keywords may be defined in the future, though it seems
unlikely.  The syntax and semantics of such keywords must be published
as RFCs and approved using the IETF Consensus process [6].  Keywords
beginning with "x-" are reserved for experiments and use among consent-
ing parties.

Optional parameters may also be defined by an IETF Consensus process.
The syntax of optional parameters is given here to allow for future def-
inition should they be needed.  Implementations of Auto-Submitted con-
forming to this specification MUST NOT fail to recognize an Auto-Submit-
ted field and keyword that contains syntactically valid optional parame-
ters, but such implementations MAY ignore those parameters if they are
present.  Parameter names beginning with "x-" are reserved for experi-
ments and use among consenting parties.

The "comment" syntactical construct can be used to indicate a reason why
this message was auto-submitted.

6. Security Considerations

Automatic responders introduce the possibility for several kinds of
attack, including:

-    Use of such responders to relay harmful or abusive content (worms,
     viruses, spam, and spymail) for the purpose of wider distribution
     of the content or masking the source of such content;

-    Use of such responders to mount denial-of-service attacks by using
     responders to relay messages to large numbers of addresses, or to
     flood individual mailboxes with a large amount of unwanted content,
     or both;

-    Deliberate or accidental use of such responders to construct mail
     loops or "sorcerer's apprentice syndrome", thus taxing the
     resources of the mail transport system;

-    In addition, the responder itself may be subject to attack by
     sending it large numbers of requests.





Moore                  Automatic E-Mail Responses              [Page 11]
Internet-Draft                                               5 June 2002


This document attempts to reduce the vulnerability of responders to such
attack, in particular by

-    Recommending that responders not relay significant content from the
     subject message (thus minimizing the potential for abusive content)

-    Recommending that responders clearly mark responses with the "Auto-
     Submitted: auto-replied" header field to distinguish them from
     messages originated by humans (in part, to minimize the potential
     for loops and denial-of-service attacks),

-    Recommending that Personal and Group Responders limit the number of
     responses sent to any individual per period of time (also limiting
     the potential damage caused by loops),

-    Recommending that responders respond to at most one address per
     incoming message (to minimize the potential for deliberate or
     accidental denial-of-service via "multiplication" or sorcerer's
     apprentice syndrome),

-    Recommending that responses should be brief and in plain text
     format (to minimize the potential for mail responders to be used as
     mechanisms for transmitting harmful content and/or disguising the
     source of harmful content).

However, because email addresses are easily forged, attacks are still
possible for any email responder which does not limit access and require
authentication before issuing a response.  The above measures attempt to
limit the damage which can be done, but they cannot entirely prevent
attacks.

This section describes vulnerabilities inherent in automatically
responding to mail.  Other vulnerabilities are associated with some
mail-based services which automatically respond to email messages, but
these are not caused by the fact that the server automatically responds
to incoming messages.  In general, all network based services (including
those accessed by email) need to provide security that is sufficient to
protect the resources that are accessible by the service against
inappropriate use.

7. IANA Considerations

Section 5 of this document defines two new extension mechanisms - new
keywords for the auto-submitted header field, and new optional
parameters for the auto-submitted field.  If at any point in the future
new keywords or paramters are approved (through an IETF Consensus
process) it may be appropriate for IANA to create a registry of such
keywords or paramters.



Moore                  Automatic E-Mail Responses              [Page 12]
Internet-Draft                                               5 June 2002


8. Acknowledgments

In the mid-1990s Jeroen Houttuin of TERENA authored a series of
internet-drafts on "Behavior of Mail Based Servers", and in particular,
one document on "Answering Servers" [7].  While these documents were (to
this author's knowledge) never formally published, they provided the
first well-reasoned argument (known to this author) as to the best way
for such servers to interface with email systems and protocols.

The idea for the auto-submitted field comes from the X.400/MHS mail
system [8].  [9] defined an "Autosubmitted" field for use when
gatewaying between X.400 and Internet mail.  Jacob Palme wrote an
internet-draft [10] defining use of the "Auto-Submitted" field for
Internet mail, which made it through Last Call without significant
objections, but got stalled in an attempt to resolve non-substantial
objections.  The definition of Auto-Submitted in this document is
derived (i.e. slightly simplified) from the one in that document, with
some text stolen outright.

Thanks are also due to those who contributed suggestions to this
document: (so far) Eric Hall, Florian Weimer, and Dan Wing.

9. Author's Address

Keith Moore
Innovative Computing Laboratory
University of Tennessee, Knoxville
1122 Volunteer Blvd, #203
Knoxville, TN 37996-3450

moore@cs.utk.edu


10. References

[1]  Moore, K. Vaudreuil, G.  An Extensible Message Format for Delivery
     Status Notifications.  RFC 1894, January 1996. (non-normative ref-
     erence)

[2]  Fajman, R.  An Extensible Message Format for Message Disposition
     Notifications. RFC 2298, March 1998.  (non-normative reference)

[3]  Bradner, S. Key words for use in RFCs to Indicate Requirement Lev-
     els.  RFC 2119, March 1997.  (normative reference)

[4]  Moore, K.  SMTP Service Extension for Delivery Status Notifica-
     tions.  RFC 1891, January 1996.  (normative reference, but only
     barely)



Moore                  Automatic E-Mail Responses              [Page 13]
Internet-Draft                                               5 June 2002


[5]  Freed, N. Borenstein, N.  Multipurpose Internet Mail Extensions
     (MIME) Part One: Format of Internet Message Bodies.  RFC 2045,
     November 1996.  (normative reference)

[6]  Narten, T., Alvestrand, H.  Guidelines for Writing an IANA Consid-
     erations Section in RFCs.  RFC 2434, October 1998.  (normative ref-
     erence)

[7]  Houttuin, J. BoMBS series: Behavior of Mail Based Servers / Part 2:
     A-BoMBS / Answering Servers.  Expired Internet-Draft draft-rare-
     msg-a-bombs-01.txt, December 1994.  Available at http://google.com/
     (non-normative reference, work apparently no longer in progress,
     included only for attribution)

[8]  X.400.  (perhaps someone can supply the correct reference for the
     first version of the X.400 document to define autosubmitted?)
     (non-normative reference)

[9]  Kille, S.  MIXER (Mime Internet X.400 Enhanced Relay): Mapping
     between X.400 and RFC 822/MIME.  RFC 2156, January 1998.  (non-nor-
     mative reference)

[10] Palme, J.  "The Auto-Submitted and Expires Headers in E-mail".
     Expired Internet-Draft "draft-ietf-mailext-new-fields-15.txt",
     February 1999. (non normative reference, work apparently no longer
     in progress, included only for attribution)

























Moore                  Automatic E-Mail Responses              [Page 14]

