			   Internet Message

			    Kazu Yamamoto
			  Tatsuya Kinoshita

			     Feb 15, 2010


			   <<<Copyright>>>

IM (Internet Message) provides a series of user interface commands
(imput, imget, imls, ...) and backend Perl5 modules to integrate
E-mail and NetNews user interface. They are designed to be used both
from Mew version 1.x and on command line.

The folder style of IM is exactly the same as that of MH. So, you can
replace MH with this package without any migration works. Moreover,
you are able to operate your messages both by IM and MH with
consistent manner.

IM is copyrighted by IM developing team. You can redistribute it
and/or modify it under the modified BSD license. See 00copyright for
more details.

IM/MD5.pm is derived from md5.pl copyrighted by NAKAMURA, Motonori
<motonori@econ.kyoto-u.ac.jp>. It is converted to Perl4 from C version
derived from the RSA Data Security, Inc. MD5 Message-Digest Algorithm.

install-sh is under the X11 license.


	      <<<Installing under the root privilege>>>

* Install Perl 5.004_04 or later if not installed. For more
information, see 00perl. Please note that Perl 5.004 is buggy.

* Execute "configure".

	% ./configure

If you want to use RPOP, execute "configure" with the "--enable-rpop"
option.

	% ./configure --enable-rpop

If you specify this option, "imget" will be made as "setuid root" for
RPOP. APOP is the default. (Set Imget.Src as you like according the
syntax that "imget -h" displays.)

* To set the im commands, just type it. (You can run the current
 commands in place!)

	% ./imls

* Install them if necessary.

If you have the root privilege or the Perl directory is writable for
you, type as follows:

	% su
	# make install

* Setup "/usr/local/lib/im/SiteConfig" and "~/.im/Config". An example is
found in "cnf.im/SiteConfig" and "dot.im/Config",
respectively. 'imsetup' would help you.


		       <<<Installing by user>>

* Install Perl 5.004 or later to a writable directory if not
installed. For more information, see 00perl.

* If you want to install 
	the im* commands    to /your/home/bin,
	the IM perl modules to /your/home/lib/IM, 
	SiteConfig          to /your/home/lib/im,
specify the "--prefix" option as follows:

	% ./configure --prefix=/your/home

The "--bindir", "--with-perldir", and "--libdir" option overrides for
each. For instance, if you want install the IM perl modules to
"/other/place/perl/IM", do as follows:

	% ./configure --prefix=/your/home --with-perldir=/other/place/perl

Note that the "--enable-rpop" option is meaningless because you don't
have the root privilege.

* Install them by "make install".

	% make install


		 <<<Contributions and Bug Reports>>>

Please send comments, bug reports, and patches to the current maintainer
  Tatsuya Kinoshita <tats@vega.ocn.ne.jp>

For the latest news of IM, please see IM (Internet Message) Official Site
  http://tats.hauN.org/im/

You can download IM from Debian mirror sites.  For more information of
the Debian im package, please see
  http://packages.qa.debian.org/im


			  <<<Programmers>>>

		Junichiro ITO           <itojun@mew.org>
		 Yoshiaki KASAHARA    <kasahara@mew.org>
		 Motonori NAKAMURA    <motonori@mew.org>
		 Kazunori NISHI       <kazunori@mew.org>
		Yoshinari NOMURA           <nom@mew.org>
		 Hidenori OHTA            <hide@mew.org>
                 Fujikazu OKUNISHI    <fuji0924@mbox.kyoto-inet.or.jp>
                 Kiyotaka SAKAI         <ksakai@mew.org>
                Toshihiko SHIMOKAWA      <toshi@mew.org>
                Fumitoshi UKAI            <ukai@jp.hpl.hp.com>
                 Kazumasa UTASHIRO    <utashiro@mew.org>
		     Kazu YAMAMOTO        <kazu@mew.org>
