kern/fml.pl                    13.30	
	kern/libenvf.pl                1.46	done
	kern/libenvfsubr.pl            0.62	done
kern/liblmtp.pl                0.24	
	kern/libloadconfig.pl          2.12	removed
	kern/libsmtp.pl                4.22	done
kern/libsmtphack.pl            0.39	
	kern/libsmtpmci.pl             0.29	done
kern/libsmtpsubr.pl            0.70	
	kern/libsmtpsubr2.pl           0.37	done?
kern/libsmtputils.pl           1.22	
	kern/libtrap.pl                0.23	removed
kern/msend.pl                  3.42	
	proc/libMIME.pl                0.73	done
proc/libamctl.pl               5.14	
proc/libarchive.pl             0.47	
	proc/libcksum.pl               0.57	done
proc/libconfirm.pl             3.99	
	proc/libcrosspost.pl           1.17	removed
proc/libcrypt.pl               0.98	
	proc/libdatabases.pl           0.72	done
	proc/libdebug.pl               0.53	removed?
proc/libdist.pl                2.03	
proc/libdisthack.pl            1.25	
proc/liberror.pl               0.38	
proc/libexpire.pl              0.66	
proc/libfml.pl                 6.13	
	proc/libfop.pl                 4.59	removed
proc/libhtmlsubr.pl            1.77	
	proc/liblibrary.pl             1.33	removed?
	proc/liblock.pl                0.32	removed
	proc/liblogmail.pl             0.22	removed
	proc/liblop.pl                 1.16	removed
	proc/libmakefml.pl             0.19	removed
	proc/libmd5.pl                 0.25	done
	proc/libmesgle.pl              1.06	done?
	proc/libmgrdom.pl              0.24	removed
	proc/libmladdr.pl              0.20	removed
proc/libmodedef.pl             1.12	
proc/libmoderated.pl           1.86	
	proc/libmodeutils.pl           0.64	removed?
proc/libmti.pl                 2.03	
proc/libnewsyslog.pl           0.69	
proc/libpgp.pl                 2.74	
	proc/libpop.pl                 0.98	removed?
proc/libqmail.pl               0.19	
proc/libra.pl                  6.35	
proc/librcs.pl                 0.27	
	proc/librelayhack.pl           0.37	removed
proc/libremote.pl              0.06	
	proc/librfc1153.pl             0.81	removed
	proc/libsendfile.pl            4.08	removed almost
	proc/libsmtpsd.pl              0.43	removed
	proc/libstardate.pl            0.21	done
proc/libsynchtml.pl            7.80	
proc/libtagdef.pl              0.48	
proc/libutils.pl               2.27	
	proc/libviruschk.pl            0.39	done
	proc/libwhois.pl               1.53	removed
